# ChallengingTables
Simple python program to generate challenging times table test sheets,
uses random number generator to select the numbers for each test.

The algorithms to avoid generation of duplicates individual tests in a
single test sheet are simple, but deemed good enough for a test set of size
100.

Tests sheets are generated by pattern matching and substituting lines in
an OpenDocument Flat XML (.fodt) template file.

For the pattern matching to work XML formatting information must match.
This is fragile, editing the template file even trivially in LibreOffice
changes all sorts of formatting!

Be warned that it is highly likely that the regular expressions will have to
be updated if the template file is changed. 
If not, matching and substitution will fail.
Also the formatting strings for individual sums may have to change.
There is probably a better way to do this!

The script generates .pdf files if LibreOffice/OpenOffice is installed,
otherwise .fodt files are generated.

The script has been tested on a number of Linux Kubuntu, Mint versions.
Untested on Windows and I have no interest in getting it to work on that.

Tests specification is through a text file with the following formatting rules.

1. The '#' character is the start of a comment all text after that is ignored
1. a contiguous sequence of commas and white space characters, are interpreted as single word break.
1. level (label for the test) specification is 
 * Level text
1. sum specification is
 * Type, count, numbers, numbers, 

Where

* Type is one of
 * Multiply2
 * Multiply3
 * Divide2
 * FractionOf
 * PercentOf
 * PercentOff
 * FractionOfFraction
 * Cubed
 * Squared
 * PowerOf
 * SquareRoot
 * CubeRoot
* count is the number of times sum type is repeated in the test.
* numbers are the operands for each sum, and are one of
 * a sequence, i.e  [number1, number2, number3, ......]
 * a range (firstNumber, lastNumber, step)

For example

   * (1, 6, 1) expands to 1,2,3,4,5,6
   * (1, 6, 2) expands to 1,3,5
 
To aid readability, you can add "labels" and write something like 
* "Sum=Multiply2  Count= 11   Numbers= a=(11, 19) b=(11, 19, 1)"
* "Type:=Multiply2  Repeat:= 11   Ranges:= a=(11, 19) b=(11, 19, 1)"
the "labels" are ignored, and should be alphabets and end with
a ':' or '='.

For increased flexibilty the script doesn't police repeat sum specifications,
this makes it possible to create test sums of the same type but with different
ranges which can be useful.

The tests are focussed on generating tests for whole numbers so the formula used
to generate the sum and therefore the range of numbers to be specified 
may not be immediately obvious.

For example to get a whole number division given numbers a and b, the sum generated is

* (a x b)/b
 * for example if a = 3 and b = 5 then the sum generated is 
  * 15 / 3

Read level14spec.txt for the complete syntax for each sum Type and the formulae used.

